[Music]
thought maybe we'll start by uh you know
start from the very beginning uh where
you know you in the first 14 pages you
talk about your you know your your
personal motivation to write this book
uh and so maybe you can sort of share
this with everybody so you know this
book um grows out of three strands which
are
interl um the first strand is um
actually grew out of out of the first
book so I'm a cancer biologist I'm a
cancer geneticist um we've our lab has
discovered some of the genes not some of
the some of the important genes in in
leukemias and lymphomas and you're
working on them so one question that is
was raised by Emperor uh is that if
cancer is um the the pathological
version of our normal selves as I call
it um famously uh quoting from be wolf
Harold wormus uh quoted from bearwolf um
in um at
Stockholm um then what's the normal
version of our normal selves uh how does
how how why are we not all of us
bursting with cancer um what keeps what
regulates um normaly um an example that
I often give my students um which
actually remains unsolved is um when
when you cut yourself um and there's a
wound in your body why don't you grow a
new limb um every time like a plant or a
tree like a new Branch um it's not clear
actually why you don't um so what makes
it possible then to maintain normaly
and that of course raises the question
which we'll come to I'm sure what
normaly is how do we Define normaly
across various parameters so so so the
first strand therefore was was cancer
this book is I like to call it a prequel
to the sequel um of emper like Star Wars
um so that's that was one strand the
second strand um was um technology so
what had happened and we'll talk a
little bit about this in um in writing
the book is that why while the book was
being written um astonishing new
technologies were bursting on the scene
of of of the gene um and I just wanted
to talk about two of those Technologies
again will go into greater depth but
this is serves as a kind of landscape
introduction but the two astonishing
Technologies one was of course the depth
of Gene sequencing um understanding the
sequence of the human genome but at a at
of course we had been sequencing genes
for a while we used to uh um you know
every time we had to sequence a gene um
I don't know how many of you remember
this but we had to take these two
gigantic glass
plates uh which were almost impossible
to manipulate and pour um a gel uh in
between those two glass plates or liquid
between those two glass plates and if
there was one bubble it would ruin the
sequence so the the art of pouring the
they were about this big um and you have
to you know move them um put a you know
cell taped them on the side and then
pour this liquid and if it was one
bubble in the whole thing the whole
thing would be ruined so um that was the
old technology and all of a sudden new
automated Technologies basically still
gel based but rapid automated
Technologies began to appear and the
capacity the sequence grew enormously
just gigantically by Leaps and Bounds
and again we'll talk about how much they
grew but the consequence of that
technology was that all of a sudden you
could sequence whole genomes or even
parts of genomes um which meant in turn
for instance you could sequence and
we'll I me now I'm starting to get into
the territory of the book you could
sequence a a fetus's genome before the
fetus was born um in fact you could
sequence a genome you could pop out a
biopsy a single cell out of an unborn
fetus keeping the rest of the fetus
alive and sequence the Genome of that
Unborn child and decide to implant that
that child because that child would
still be alive that fetus would still be
alive so already the universe was the
known universe was crumbling and at the
same time within the next two two to
three years yet another technology
appeared in which we could change the
human genome in a directional Manner and
we need to understand some words here
the genome is uh a word that we've used
to describe the entire set of all
information that an organism possesses
so basically it's all our genes and all
the stuff that's in between genes the
sequences that are between genes so the
human genome we now know contains 3
billion uh uh pieces of uh nucleotides
of DNA and the information is written in
just four bases it's written in A C T
and G so the human genome if you were to
read The genome would read a c g g c c
CT G and so forth now
if it was an encyclopedia if it was
published as a book in fact with this
font um it would be 66 full sets of the
encyclopedia britanica so we would walk
into this room and every wall would be
covered with um 66 full sets of the
encyclopedia Banica and what you could
do is you could pick out you know set 17
volume 4 number three and it would read
you would open it to Page four and it
would read a c g g c c g c CCC and so
forth and it would be totally
inscrutable to you and me and yet your
first embryonic cell can use that 3
billion letter sequence to build you and
me and to make sure that you and I for
the most part have 10 fingers and not 15
as I said and we share all these
similarities and yet you look different
from me right so that information in
that sequence has that has that capacity
so as I said the First
Technology was the capacity to now
derive the sequence across all those
three billion nucleotides and that was
of course the Human Genome Project um
that was one technology and the second
technology was even more astonishing and
it wasn't even it didn't it wasn't it it
wasn't it didn't exist when I started
writing the book but it began to appear
as the book was being written and that
is technologies that allowed us and now
allow us to go into this encyclopedia
identify one word of your
choice erase that word and potentially
change it for a different word so this
has been called genetic surgery it's
been called genomic
engineering um it's called lots of
different ways now you could say well
why does this matter well that word may
be the word that specifies your risk for
having an increase risk for
autism that word might be the word that
uh changes your risk for having an
increased risk for a terrifying
neurodegenerative disease um it might be
in some people's conception we'll talk
about this as well um uh a gene variant
that increases
height um or a gene variant that reduces
your risk for obesity um so these were
this technology was been has been called
crisper C n there are thousand new words
for it so these two pieces of technology
which I call reading and writing the
genome reading it because you can read
all the three billion odd based Pairs
and writing it because you can now edit
it as if you were working on a word
processor you could edit it suddenly
began to appear um and I be we began to
use it and the astonishing thing was how
easy it was so that was strand two
strand one as I said was cancer strand
two was this reading and writing the
genome and perhaps the most important
one and that's why I kept it last was
the personal um the story of my own
family's history of mental illness is
the backdrop to all of this book um this
book wouldn't exist if it wasn't for
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder in my
family um and the desire to find out
what was behind it why is it that some
members are affected and some members
are not affected and I would say this is
the story of every family um it's the
story there is no family where there is
not not such a discussion or not such a
kind of discussion about some kind of
illness some kind of propensity some
kind of change in Destiny or fate where
um all of a sudden it the the the gene
doesn't become something that's vastly
impersonal something that happens in
some laboratory somewhere but all of a
sudden comes and rests in you because
we're talking about the two things that
human beings have cared about since the
beginning of time identity and heredity
how we are why we are who we are why
likeness exists and how we transmit
likeness to our children um you know
these are if there are two obsessions in
human history uh Beyond any Obsession I
think it is you know the the question of
of identity and heredity um and so this
became a question for me because I had
now two uncles and a cousin who were
affected um why was it not everyone what
why was it skipping generations and the
how colored How Deeply it colored my
childhood and Adolescence was becoming
more more apparent they they say if you
use the color cobalt blue in a painting
the painting is forever changed nothing
nothing Remains the Same if you put one
drop of cobalt and maybe it has to do
with the way we look at Cobalt maybe it
has to do with the way the eye sees that
blue um if you use one drop of a
personal story in a book it colors the
whole story it will change the entire
book forever um and so you have to be
extremely in fact you have to be very
very careful with the cobalt blue of
personal stories um in any book um uh
particularly in a book like this and so
but there was no way to avoid it uh the
book begins there much like Emperor did
and of course it colors the whole the
whole book so that then let me ask you
seemingly simple question if there's a
parent who 6 feet let's take height as a
trait right uh parent is 6 fet the other
parent is 3 ft so um why doesn't a child
become six or three versus something in
between well so that's again so so that
was the that was the very confusing
piece so so Mel's prediction would be
that if the child is 6 feet and there's
a parent who's 6 feet tall and a child
is 3 feet tall then the child should
either be either be one or the other
because the information is digitized or
quantized and um and and with the
information be produced like that it
turns out that most human traits most
traits are not governed by one gene so
height we now know has about five
dominant genes
and if so what really is happening is
that the five genes Each of which is
quantized in one parent and the five
genes the five Gene variants Each of
which is quantized in the other parent
is mixing
together none of the individual
particles are changing but their
interaction is ultimately producing a
child whose height might be 4.5 ft or
five you know seven whatever whatever
number of feet and the analogy that I
use in fact which is the reason this
book has this cover um is that if you
take seven pieces of colored paper paper
seven pieces of different colored paper
you can mix and and and put them all
together juxtapose them together and if
you look at the juter position you can
actually create all the colors or not
all the colors most of the colors of the
human Spectrum right but those seven
individual pieces of colored paper
haven't
changed so what's what's astonishing
about it is and to continue the analogy
the father in this case has seven pieces
of colored paper
the mother in this case has seven pieces
of colored paper the child is produced
by a ju position of those seven plus 7
pieces of colored paper 5 + 5 in the
case of height of colored paper to
produce something that looks in color
unlike any one of those individual
pieces but here's the most important
Point none of those individual pieces of
colored paper has changed none of those
individual pieces of transparent paper
has changed when that child now
reproduces uses again with another child
they will again bring together five
sheets of transparent paper another five
sheets of transparent paper and create
an overlap creating the unbelievable
diversity that you see in the faces in
this audience but here's what's amazing
about it none of those individual pieces
have changed yeah the one driblet of
information the one Quant of information
that carried that one quanta that
colored your eye is still there and if
you went into the human genome if you
looked through the encyclopedia you
would find it and it would still be
there as a Quantum so each one of us is
a dictionary for our ancestors each one
of us has to be a dictionary for
ancestors it is a it is a necessity of
genes that each one of us carries in
ourselves a dictionary for the of our
ancestors
[Music]